Update charter with communication responsibilities (#1754)
nodejs/TSC: TSC-Charter.md

* Development process and any coding standards.
* Mediating technical conflicts between Collaborators or Foundation
  projects.

> * Technical communication.

Reviewer: I believe this needs more definition.

Reviewer: I prefer the wording I have proposed.

> * Technical communication.

Reviewer: I think it's better to be explicit given that there's been disagreement about what is or is not covered. Therefore I prefer the text the way I suggested.

> * Technical communication.

Author: I have listed the categories explicitly. Is that fine?

> * Communication about the above that would be considered official, and the development process of said communication.

Reviewer 2: Or actually, that might be a bit too meta, there is:

1. Governance of technical things A, B, C, D
2. Technical things A, B, C, D

Trying to find a wording that covers both 1 and 2, because the above points are mostly about 1..

```suggestion
* Official communication about the above and what they govern, and the development process of said communication.
```

> The TSC will define Node.js project’s release vehicles.

Reviewer 2: > Nothing in this charter should be interpreted as preventing the Foundation from also publishing about any aspect of the project, including all technical aspects, so long as those communications are not presented as being endorsed by, or representative of, the TSC or the body of project contributors except when specifically approved by the TSC. 

That seems to be preventing nothing, because everything technical that the foundation publishes can be interpreted as being endorsed by TSC/project contributors. This practically only suggests:

> The Foundation is permitted to publish about the technical aspect of the project, as long as it includes a disclaimer explaining the content does not represent and is not endorsed by the Node.js TSC or the project contributors.

Which seems a pretty weird thing to suggest and I have never seen such content, if you ask me..

> The TSC will define Node.js project’s release vehicles.

Author: I'll accept James' suggestion now. Joyee, can you post your concerns on the relevant lines of the PR? It would be easier to keep track of the suggestions.

> The TSC will define Node.js project’s release vehicles.

Reviewer: > In terms of sponsorship, the exact work being sponsored may be highly technical

It's not clear what you're suggesting here. There's nothing here that says a contributor writing a blog post can't mention that their individual work was financially sponsored by someone. In fact, nothing here places any limits on content, it places guidelines around review and oversight.

> The word marketing can be used very broadly, which can also include technical content.

That's why I specifically used the qualifier "Brand Marketing", which is distinct from "Technical Marketing"

> That seems to be preventing nothing, because everything technical that the foundation publishes can be interpreted as being endorsed by TSC/project contributors

The reality here is we actually cannot prevent the Foundation from publishing any kind of content it wants to publish, so this paragraph really isn't strictly necessary but is there more for clarification of TSC member expectations -- that is, there's no variation in any of this in which the TSC can demand make demands on the Foundation.

* Development process and any coding standards.
* Mediating technical conflicts between Collaborators or Foundation
  projects.
* Official communication about the above and what they govern, and the development process of said communication.

The TSC will define Node.js project’s release vehicles.

> Specific exclusions from the communication oversight responsibilities include: brand marketing, fundraising and financial sponsorship (including, but not limited to, the OpenJS Foundation's financial sponsorship of the project), legal matters, and marketing/ community events, except when specifically approved by the OpenJS Foundation. 

Author: ```suggestion
Specific exclusions from the communication oversight responsibilities include:

* Brand marketing
* Fundraising and financial sponsorship (including, but not limited to, the OpenJS Foundation's financial sponsorship of the project)
* Legal matters
* Marketing/ community events

except when specifically approved by the OpenJS Foundation. 
```

* Development process and any coding standards.
* Mediating technical conflicts between Collaborators or Foundation
  projects.
* Establishing and stewarding a consensus-seeking process to represent the technical community and its work in external communications. The scope includes:
  * Technical development and its process in the the project
  * Releases and release announcements
  * Technical documentation
  * Contributor onboarding and conduct
  * Project governance

>   * Technical direction

Reviewer 2: See https://github.com/nodejs/TSC/pull/1754#discussion_r2173773565 (I agree it’s better not to duplicate and just say something like "the above")

  * The project website and download server

>   * Petition from the technical community that can be surfaced to the CPC level

Reviewer 2: See https://github.com/nodejs/TSC/pull/1754#discussion_r2180543188 - a specific example would be the org-wide vote of the pride campaign that we just did.

>   * Petition from the technical community that can be surfaced to the CPC level

Reviewer 3: I don’t quite understand in which case this would be escalated to the CPC, or why the CPC should be involved.

>   * Petition from the technical community that can be surfaced to the CPC level

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  * Petition from the technical community to form a representation
```

I would be fine with this too. Though it seems in [another PR there's inclination to make these kind of things part of the CPC scope](https://github.com/nodejs/TSC/pull/1756#discussion_r2178177364)  (to me if the CPC is willing to take over the workload of stewarding a representation, it seems fine to shed off the workload from the TSC. But then it also seems fair for projects to have their own autonomy on this - having an project-wide referendum sounds a lot more manageable than a foundation-wide referendum).

The TSC will define Node.js project’s release vehicles.

Communication on topics where the scope of the TSC intersects with that of the [OpenJS CPC][] or the [OpenJS board][] will be handled in collaboration with the other two bodies, facilitated by the TSC representative on the CPC.

If a Node.js-specific communication channel, such as a social media account or a discussion forum, is established by another party and used to represent the technical work or the technical community of the project, the TSC may request administrator or moderator access to ensure representation is aligned with the consensus within the project. Day-to-day operation in such channels can be delegated to another party as long as they follow the Code of Conduct, and respect the consensus seeking process before representation of the project is manifested.

> If the TSC becomes aware of external communications that appear inconsistent with the project’s consensus, it may engage with the communicating party, directly or through appropriate channels, to help align the message with the project’s consensus-seeking processes.

Reviewer 2: This documents that when someone speaks on behalf of the project on social media that is inconsistent with the project’s consensus, or without confirming consensus, the TSC would communicate and align the two. For example if someone that’s seen as a representative of the project - or the official account itself - declares “we’ll deprecate this feature in the next release” but there is no consensus within the project whether it should be deprecated, the TSC would communicate to them to get it corrected. This is what we’ve already been doing (not necessarily deprecation but I think you'd probably remember similar things that happened in the past).

> If the TSC becomes aware of external communications that appear inconsistent with the project’s consensus, it may engage with the communicating party, directly or through appropriate channels, to help align the message with the project’s consensus-seeking processes.

Reviewer: Honestly, this is tending towards way too much bureaucracy and process than what is going to be helpful/useful. Yes, we should all be careful about what we say before we're certain there's consensus but it's not something we need formal processes around.

> If the TSC becomes aware of external communications that appear inconsistent with the project’s consensus, it may engage with the communicating party, directly or through appropriate channels, to help align the message with the project’s consensus-seeking processes.

Reviewer 2: I think it's case by case on whether there needs formal process:

1. In the case of technical work, the process is already on GitHub and likely is very obvious to TSC members who know what seals the consensus and when there's no clear consensus (e.g. removing/keeping corepack, standards body representation).
2. In the case of community representation, IMO a org-wide vote was already a good enough precedence.

The idea isn't that the TSC must be very hands-on on how the representation is manifested, just that those who declares representation should ensure, at least by themselves, that the representation aligns with the consensus that's already been built, that part doesn't need involvement from the TSC, but obviously they can always ask for help from the TSC. And when the two aren't aligned, the TSC is in a position to remind them. Without granting TSC this in the charter, for example I could just go to TC39 and frame my own opinion as the Node.js's project opinion, and the TSC would have no right to correct me (not that I would do it at TC39).

* Development process and any coding standards.
* Mediating technical conflicts between Collaborators or Foundation
  projects.

> * Official communication about the above and what they govern, and the development process of said communication.

Reviewer: "Official communication" is too vague here. I've no idea what would make it "official"

> * Official communication about the above and what they govern, and the development process of said communication.

Reviewer: Again, the word "misrepresentation" in English implies intentionality to deceive or defraud. This language is far too adversarial in tone.

The TSC will define Node.js project’s release vehicles.

> Specific exclusions from the communication oversight responsibilities include:

Author: This should address James' comment in https://github.com/nodejs/TSC/pull/1754#discussion_r2171825790
```suggestion
The communication oversight responsibilities include:

* Technical development processes of the project
* Releases and release announcements
* Technical documentation
* Contributor onboarding and conduct
* Project governance
* Technical direction

Specific exclusions from the communication oversight responsibilities include:
```

* Brand marketing
* Fundraising and financial sponsorship (including, but not limited to, the OpenJS Foundation's financial sponsorship of the project)
* Legal matters
* Marketing/ community events

> except when specifically approved by the OpenJS Foundation.

Reviewer: It's starting to feel like there's an implication here that the folks on the foundation side aren't "technical" or "part of the community", which clearly is not the case. Again, the suggested wording here is not an improvement.

> except when specifically approved by the OpenJS Foundation.

Reviewer 2: IMO being technical or being part of the community doesn't automatically grant one authority over representation of the project, even if they are part of the TSC (or especially when they are part of the TSC). On the other hand, as long as consensus seeking is respected, someone not technical and not part of the community can also have the vote of confidence for representation agreed upon by the project.

Even the TSC itself is always careful about consensus seeking when building a representation, and the current text is suggesting the foundation is above the rules that the TSC itself is so careful about.

> the folks on the foundation side aren't "technical" or "part of the community"

That is a bit of an overstatement. I think the distinction would be

1. Whether they use or develop on Node.js as a software in their day-to-day work
2. Whether they engage with the technical community on GitHub, where development of the project happens

For example, hypothetically a Python developer who did not engage with the Node.js community on GitHub but only interacted with the subset of the community on Bluesky could be considered both technical and part of the community. But how much insight they have into the project is still in correlation with how much they use Node.js and interact with a broader group of the community. Though insight isn't the most relevant in this context - even the TSC cannot excuse themselves from not respecting consensus seeking by claiming insight.

> except when specifically approved by the OpenJS Foundation.

Author: How about this?
```suggestion
Communication on excluded oversight areas that intersect with included responsibilities will be handled in collaboration with the OpenJS Foundation.
```

This incorporates Robin's suggestion from https://github.com/nodejs/TSC/pull/1756#issuecomment-3021256291

> All uses of OpenJS Foundation-owned trademarks and IP are, of course, subject to review and approval by the Foundation in all project-relevant communication across all media formats and modes in accordance to the OpenJS Foundation Trademark Policy. This includes use of the marks, in full or in part, in domain names, social media account handles, event names and other similar identifiers.

Reviewer 2: Actually this part is redundant, because bellow it already put it quite clearly:

> The TSC and entire technical community will follow any processes as may
> be specified by the OpenJS Foundation Board relating to the intake and license
> compliance review of contributions, including the OpenJS Foundation IP Policy.

So we might as well just leave it there.

```suggestion
```

> The TSC may establish project-specific communication channels, such as social media accounts and discussion forums, administered under the oversight of the TSC, subject to the above requirements. Such communication channels must be capable of being administered jointly by both the TSC and the Foundation.

Reviewer 4: Does this imply that the TSC is going to create _separate_ social accounts from those that already exist for the project? I would think it would be much better if this states that the TSC can use existing channels where they exist, or set up new ones where they don't, for their communication activities.

Reviewer: Nope, doesn't imply that at all. It just closes a current gap in the charter. For instance, we recently created a discord channel for the project but it's not at all clear that the TSC actually has chartered oversight of that. Nothing in this language should be expected to imply that anything *new* will be created.

Reviewer 4: Ah okay, so "establish" here is to gain oversight of existing channels? I feel this could be clarified

Reviewer: Nothing in this should be interpreted as the TSC asserting oversight over any existing channels. That's not what this is. The TSC and the Foundation still need to work out oversight over a number of the existing channels (twitter account, linkedin account, etc). There's been a fair amount of confusion because of the lack of clarity here on what the project does or does not have oversight over.

This previously hasn't been a problem but there have been some differences in opinion lately over how some of these channels have been managed and a subset of project contributors have asserted that they believe they are more capable of managing the channels and content than the Foundation representatives. This has caused a fair amount of friction recently (rather needlessly and toxically in my opinion because we really ought to all recognize that we're working towards the same goal and all bring relative strengths and weaknesses into the mix and we should just be finding better ways of collaborating rather than trying to find ways of working around each other.. but hey, it is what it is).

So no, this is not to "gain oversigh" of existing channels. It's the start to putting guardrails in place to avoid the kind of drama and back and forth we've been having to deal with over the past few months.

> The TSC may establish project-specific communication channels, such as social media accounts and discussion forums, administered under the oversight of the TSC, subject to the above requirements. Such communication channels must be capable of being administered jointly by both the TSC and the Foundation.

Reviewer 2: I feel that we don't have to be so hands-on, or this is difficult to enforce in practice - the TSC is not paid to do this, and the foundation is quite understaffed to administer all of this (which can be told from the abandoning of mastodon). What we can aim for is to delegate as long as the consensus seeking process is respected.

```suggestion
The community may establish project-specific communication channels, such as social media accounts and discussion forums, subject to the above requirements. If the communication channels is used to represent the project, administrator access should be granted to both the TSC and the Foundation for oversight, while the day-to-day operation can be delegated as long as they respect the consensus seeking process of the project.
```

This for example, just documents how Discord is managed - someone established it, and we got administrator access for it to be "official", but it doesn't mean we actually use it that much.

> Nothing in this charter should be interpreted as preventing the Foundation from also publishing about any aspect of the project, including all technical aspects, so long as those communications are not presented as being endorsed by, or representative of, the TSC or the body of project contributors except when specifically approved by the TSC.

Reviewer: I don't see how this is an improvement over the original.

> Nothing in this charter should be interpreted as preventing the Foundation from also publishing about any aspect of the project, including all technical aspects, so long as those communications are not presented as being endorsed by, or representative of, the TSC or the body of project contributors except when specifically approved by the TSC.

Reviewer 2: Another alternative, to prevent documenting what another organization should or should not do in the TSC charter, which seems out of our control in general. But we can document what we'll try to do:

```suggestion
When the TSC notices that the project - including the technical work of the project and the community behind the work - is misrepresented in external communications by a third party - even when it's the Foundation - the TSC will try to communicate to the third party to make sure the representation of the project only comes from consensus within the project.
```

It doesn't mean that we'll always succeed - our requests can be denied, but since the TSC does hold a bit of weight that no other party holds in this regard, if we just leave our voices unused when they are the only voices powerful enough to make a difference, we are effectively allowing the misrepresentation to happen.

> Nothing in this charter should be interpreted as preventing the Foundation from also publishing about any aspect of the project, including all technical aspects, so long as those communications are not presented as being endorsed by, or representative of, the TSC or the body of project contributors except when specifically approved by the TSC.

Reviewer: The foundation is not a "third party". We're literally the same team working towards the same goals.

Also, "misrepresented" is a loaded term. Bugs happen when writing blog posts the same way they happen when writing code. This proposed text is needlessly adversarial.

> Nothing in this charter should be interpreted as preventing the Foundation from also publishing about any aspect of the project, including all technical aspects, so long as those communications are not presented as being endorsed by, or representative of, the TSC or the body of project contributors except when specifically approved by the TSC.

Reviewer 2: > Bugs happen when writing blog posts the same way they happen when writing code.

I agree bugs can happen and happens all the time - for example, opening a pul request and getting an approval to land is fine. However, pushing a bug directly to the main branch without asking anyone to review is not, and the passage is trying to prevent "pushing to the main branch without seeking consensus from others".

> The foundation is not a "third party". We're literally the same team working towards the same goals.

The third party here has a pretty specific meaning: first party is the TSC, second party is the project, third party is others. It can also be argued that the TSC and the project are the same team working towards the same goals (the TSC is even, by definition, a strict subset of the technical project contributors), but I think that doesn't necessarily mean that the TSC and the project are the same party.

> This proposed text is needlessly adversarial.

Let me give it another stab (I'm not a native English speaker, so generally don't know how adversarial it is)

```suggestion
If the TSC becomes aware of external communications that do not fully reflect the project’s consensus - whether issued by the Foundation or any other third party – the TSC may engage with the communicating party, directly or through appropriate channels, to help align the message with the project’s consensus-seeking processes.
```

> Nothing in this charter should be interpreted as preventing the Foundation from also publishing about any aspect of the project, including all technical aspects, so long as those communications are not presented as being endorsed by, or representative of, the TSC or the body of project contributors except when specifically approved by the TSC.

Reviewer 2: Suggested wording SGTM (in reality, this party does not have to be third, we remind TSC members and other project contributors not to over represent the project without consensus all the time too)

* Development process and any coding standards.
* Mediating technical conflicts between Collaborators or Foundation
  projects.

> * Establishing and stewarding a consensus-seeking process to represent the technical community and its work in external communications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Establishing and stewarding a consensus-seeking process to represent the technical community and its work in external communications. The scope includes:
  * Technical development and its process in the the project
  * Releases and release announcements
  * Technical documentation
  * Contributor onboarding and conduct
  * Project governance
  * Technical direction
  * The project website and download server
  * Community petition that can be surfaced to the CPC level
```

Tweaked the first point to be `Technical development and its process in the the project` since the two can be viewed separately. And added `Community petition that can be surfaced to the CPC level` which I think include the pride campaign process - someone petition to the TSC to make a community stance, we decide that TSC cannot speak for the project and it'd be best to have an org-wide vote to get a project stance, and we stewarded an org-wide vote so that the petitioners got a vote of confidence. I don't know after the vote whether this was properly notified to the CPC, but it also seems reasonable to say that the TSC is in a position to establish and steward the process on a project-internal level before surfacing it to the CPC, unless the CPC is interested in directly getting involved in this kind of process for all the projects instead of just reviewing the result that come out of a project with their own representation building process.

The TSC will define Node.js project’s release vehicles.

> The communication oversight responsibilities include:
> 
> * Technical development processes of the project
> * Releases and release announcements
> * Technical documentation
> * Contributor onboarding and conduct
> * Project governance
> * Technical direction
> 
> Specific exclusions from the communication oversight responsibilities include:
> 
> * Brand marketing
> * Fundraising and financial sponsorship (including, but not limited to, the OpenJS Foundation's financial sponsorship of the project)
> * Legal matters
> * Marketing/ community events
> 
> Communication on excluded oversight areas that intersect with included responsibilities will be handled in collaboration with the OpenJS Foundation.

Reviewer 2: Rather than listing a static snapshot here, I think it would be better to just link to the responsibility of the foundation. Also, the idea of "the OpenJS Foundation" is vague - there is the CPC and the board. It's not exactly clear, from this wording, which we are talking about. Listing the two as "included" or "excluded" also can be seen as adversarial, in reality we are just specialized differently but intersect often.  So I'd suggest:

```suggestion
Communication on topics where the scope of the TSC intersects with that of the [OpenJS CPC](https://github.com/openjs-foundation/cross-project-council/blob/main/CPC-CHARTER.md) or the [OpenJS board](https://images.prismic.io/openjsf/c31b195a-83c9-4d89-9d92-d0cb8840ea20_OpenJS-Foundation-Bylaws-2023-09-18.pdf) will be handled in collaboration with the other two bodies, facilitated by the TSC representative on the CPC.
```

Personally I think the charter should empower the TSC to collaborate and facilitate, it's a bit out of place to document here "the TSC is not allowed to..." with a paternalistic wording.

Author: In https://github.com/nodejs/TSC/pull/1754#discussion_r2173773565, @jasnell wanted to explicitly mention the categories because there's been disagreement about what is or is not covered

Reviewer 2: It seems in https://github.com/nodejs/TSC/pull/1756#discussion_r2180433024 @jasnell agreed that this list doesn't belong here either (and belong to the CPC charter, which the suggestion links to).

Author: We can drop the exclusions but keep the inclusions part and also add the project website and download server to the list as Matteo mentioned in the next comment.

Author: Sounds good. I agree that the release vehicles line is redundant.

> The community may establish project-specific communication channels, such as social media accounts and discussion forums, subject to the above requirements. If the communication channels are used to represent the project, administrator access should be granted to both the TSC and the Foundation for oversight, while the day-to-day operation can be delegated to another party as long as they respect the consensus seeking process of the project.

Reviewer 2: Trying to be more specific again since the idea of "the Foundation" is vague..

```suggestion
The community may establish project-specific communication channels, such as social media accounts and discussion forums, subject to the above requirements. If the communication channels are used to represent the project, administrator access should be granted to both the TSC and staff delegated by the Foundation for oversight, while the day-to-day operation can be delegated to another party as long as they respect the consensus seeking process of the project.
```

* Development process and any coding standards.
* Mediating technical conflicts between Collaborators or Foundation
  projects.
* Establishing and stewarding a consensus-seeking process to represent the technical community and its work in external communications.

The TSC will define Node.js project’s release vehicles.

The communication oversight responsibilities include:

* Technical development processes of the project
* Releases and release announcements
* Technical documentation
* Contributor onboarding and conduct
* Project governance
* Technical direction

Specific exclusions from the communication oversight responsibilities include:

* Brand marketing
* Fundraising and financial sponsorship (including, but not limited to, the OpenJS Foundation's financial sponsorship of the project)
* Legal matters
* Marketing/ community events

except when specifically approved by the OpenJS Foundation.

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```
